---
category: tech-blog
date: '2026-04-17'
fetched_at: '2026-04-23T18:57:23Z'
source: Simon Willison
tags:
- datasette
title: datasette 1.0a28
url: https://simonwillison.net/2026/Apr/17/datasette/#atom-everything
---

17th April 2026
I was upgrading Datasette Cloud to 1.0a27 and discovered a nasty collection of accidental breakages caused by changes in that alpha. This new alpha addresses those directly:
- Fixed a compatibility bug introduced in 1.0a27 where
execute_write_fn()
callbacks with a parameter name other thanconn
were seeing errors. (#2691)- The database.close() method now also shuts down the write connection for that database.
- New datasette.close() method for closing down all databases and resources associated with a Datasette instance. This is called automatically when the server shuts down. (#2693)
- Datasette now includes a pytest plugin which automatically calls
datasette.close()
on temporary instances created in function-scoped fixtures and during tests. See Automatic cleanup of Datasette instances for details. This helps avoid running out of file descriptors in plugin test suites that were written before theDatabase(is_temp_disk=True)
feature introduced in Datasette 1.0a27. (#2692)
Most of the changes in this release were implemented using Claude Code and the newly released Claude Opus 4.7.
Recent articles
- Is Claude Code going to cost $100/month? Probably not - it's all very confusing - 22nd April 2026
- Where's the raccoon with the ham radio? (ChatGPT Images 2.0) - 21st April 2026
- Changes in the system prompt between Claude Opus 4.6 and 4.7 - 18th April 2026
