---
category: tech-blog
date: '2026-04-15'
fetched_at: '2026-04-23T18:57:23Z'
source: Simon Willison
tags:
- annotated-release-notes
- datasette
- python
title: datasette 1.0a27
url: https://simonwillison.net/2026/Apr/15/datasette/#atom-everything
---

15th April 2026
Two major changes in this new Datasette alpha. I covered the first of those in detail yesterday - Datasette no longer uses Django-style CSRF form tokens, instead using modern browser headers as described by Filippo Valsorda.
The second big change is that Datasette now fires a new RenameTableEvent any time a table is renamed during a SQLite transaction. This is useful because some plugins (like datasette-comments) attach additional data to table records by name, so a renamed table requires them to react in appropriate ways.
Here are the rest of the changes in the alpha:
- New actor= parameter for
datasette.client
methods, allowing internal requests to be made as a specific actor. This is particularly useful for writing automated tests. (#2688)- New
Database(is_temp_disk=True)
option, used internally for the internal database. This helps resolve intermittent database locked errors caused by the internal database being in-memory as opposed to on-disk. (#2683) (#2684)- The
/<database>/<table>/-/upsert
API (docs) now rejects rows withnull
primary key values. (#1936)- Improved example in the API explorer for the
/-/upsert
endpoint (docs). (#1936)- The
/<database>.json
endpoint now includes an"ok": true
key, for consistency with other JSON API responses.- call_with_supported_arguments() is now documented as a supported public API. (#2678)
Recent articles
- Is Claude Code going to cost $100/month? Probably not - it's all very confusing - 22nd April 2026
- Where's the raccoon with the ham radio? (ChatGPT Images 2.0) - 21st April 2026
- Changes in the system prompt between Claude Opus 4.6 and 4.7 - 18th April 2026
